Describe how a particular story's or drama's plot unfolds in a series of episodes as well as how characters respond or change as the plot moves toward a resolution.
Today we will read about a sea captain named Charlie Noble has retired to Bald Head Island, near Singing Beach and learn about the (tie to the focus standard skill)
Excerpt from “Charlie Noble and Mate”
by Louis Arthur Norton
1 	Charlie’s companion was a black Labrador Retriever named Mate. Dogs learn obedience commands from the language of their owners. Instead of ordinary English, Mate responded to instructions that the captain used aboard ship like on board, meaning “come to your master,” and many other commands such as luff for “slow down,” avast for “stay,” heave to for “stop,” capsize for “roll over,” hail for “speak,” pipe down for “stop barking,” backwater for “move away,” shipshape for “good dog,” and most welcome, hardtack for “biscuit reward.”
2 	When Charlie and Mate walked the streets of Bald Head or strolled along the sands of Singing Beach, they swayed from side to side as if they were on a pitching deck in a choppy sea. Townsfolk would pat the dog’s head and say nice things, but Mate just looked at them with his head cocked to one side and one ear raised. It seemed as if they were speaking to him in a foreign tongue, using words that were indeed strange to him.
3	Charlie Noble owned a sailboat named the Fast and Able. Sailing in each other’s company provided a perfect afternoon for Charlie and Mate, but they did not go too far from shore in the small boat. Mate either slept on the sun-warmed deck or joined Charlie in the cockpit, usually snuggling up to his master. If a fogbank rolled in, Mate would bark loudly, acting as the Fast and Able’s foghorn.
4	One sunny day as they sailed along the shoreline, a strong wind gust caused the sailboat to jibe1 suddenly.The heavy wooden boom holding the sail swung wildly and hit the old captain on the side of his head. Charlie fell to the bottom of the boat unconscious.
5	Mate whimpered and frantically licked his master’s face, but the old seaman did not move. The boat was now adrift, 2 but not too far from land. Somehow the dog realized he should swim to shore and get help. Being a retriever he was a good swimmer, so Mate leaped into the cold water and dog-paddled to the beach.
6	Once ashore, Mate raced over the sand dunes and down the road toward the village. When he reached the town green, he tried to attract attention, running in circles and barking frantically.
7	The people of Bald Head shouted questions at the sopping wet dog. “What’s the matter, pup? Where’s your master?” But the dog seemed confused and barked even louder.
8 	A young sailor in the crowd named Jake, a former shipmate of Charlie, recognized Mate and remembered that the old man’s dog responded to “sailor talk.” Jake bellowed in a deep voice, “Heave to!” followed by “Pipe down!” Mate stopped running in circles, then rapidly wagged his tail. The dog seemed to understand. Realizing that the captain might be in trouble, Jake then shouted, “On board!” and the eager dog led the sailor and concerned townsfolk down the road to the beach.
9	There the would-be rescuers saw the sailboat adrift offshore, but there were no rescue boats on the strand.  Jake turned toward Mate and yelled, “On board!” once again. Mate wagged his tail even more rapidly as if to say, “Good idea!” He jumped into the surf and swam for the Fast and Able.
10	Mate reached the boat and scrabbled over the side. Once on board, he barked loudly while violently shaking himself. The cold seawater flew off Mate’s furry coat and splashed over Charlie, who now began to stir. Mate whimpered once again and licked Charlie’s face. The dazed old man sat up slowly, rubbing the side of his sore head. Charlie looked in Mate’s direction and grinned, then took a firm grip on the tiller.4 A fresh sea breeze filled the sail of the boat, and the vessel came to life.
11 	Jake and the other folks onshore gave a cheer and turned back toward Bald Head. Charlie soly whispered, “Shipshape!” to Mate, then a little louder, “Hardtack!” and gave Mate a dog biscuit. The sea dog had saved the day—and perhaps his master’s life.
12 	When Charlie and Mate finally docked the Fast and Able at the town landing, the old mariner had a broad smile on his face. Charlie straightened his captain’s cap and assumed his tall, dignified posture. Once again the retired ship’s master and his beloved dog took their customary walk along the cobblestone lanes of Bald Head and the cool sands of Singing Beach, swaying sailor-like together.
1 jibe: change from leaning in one direction to leaning in the opposite direction
2 adrift: floating without control
3 strand: beach
4 tiller: lever used for steering a boat
